
Brenan Stewart
12/15/17
FIN 5350 Essay

Today’s economists are tasked with conducting research and making predictions and explanations almost every aspect of life on earth. As one of my economics professors told me this semester, “every academic discipline is just a subset of economics.” Because economics encompasses such a huge array of responsibilities, it carries immense importance. At the same time, the vastness of the field and the uncertainty of the outcomes that it attempts to clarify makes it extremely difficult to have confidence in the answers that it provides. 

One of the more popular methods utilized by today’s economists is the linear regression model. Linear regression models have many practical uses. Most of these uses have goals that are either to predict/forecast an outcome or to show the strength of a relationship between different control variables and a response variables. The coefficients that are used to quantify this relationship are referred to as estimators. In order for these estimators to carry the most weight in an explanatory or predictive model, they need to satisfy the Gauss-Markov assumptions. These assumptions are as follows:

First, the relationship between the control (X) variables and the response (Y) variable needs to be linear in parameters. This assumption is easy to satisfy in comparison to the other assumptions. Although many relationships are not linear, for example logarithmic ones, many of these relationships can be converted into linear models by adding in different multipliers/adjusters. Second, the sample needs to be a random selection from the population. This is a much harder condition to satisfy and rarely happens without some sort of experimental controlling done by the experimenters. Third, there needs to be variation in the X variable(s). No conclusions can be drawn in how age affects intelligence by studying only 8-year-olds. There needs to be a sample with variation in the input variable. Fourth, the unobserved, or error term in the equation has an expected value of zero given any value of the control variable also referred to as the zero conditional mean assumption. And finally, the error has the same variance given any value of explanatory variable (Wooldridge, 2013).

Once all of these assumptions have been truly satisfied, and given the X variables of interest, your model can be said to have the ability to estimate the value of the response variable in a linearly unbiased manner. What we often end up finding in the world of economics is just how difficult it is to satisfy all of these assumptions. Because of several factors including the pressure for economists to publish research, the economist will take the data and attempt to transform it in order to make it look like the model actually fits the data. They can do this through a variety of methods that often involve some sort of messing with the data by removing outliers or trying to shuffle around parameters or over controlling and over optimizing their data. They do this all in an attempt to show why their models are correct and why they do have predictive powers, when in actuality they have undergone methods of data mining or p-hacking in order to show patterns in data that are not actually there. This has turned the field of economic research into more of a field of applied math rather than a scientific field (Buchanan, 1964).

Computer simulation is another method utilized by fewer economists in their research. It is still in its early days but presents some promising and exciting opportunities to furthering understanding in this field. A computer simulation can be explained as the mimicking of one process through a computerized process (Reiss, 2011). These simulations have the ability to be extremely complex and take in many more inputs and factors than a linear regression model. In fact, simulations are often defined as the use of a computer in solving an equation that is not or even cannot be solved analytically (Reiss, 2011).

One of the biggest weaknesses in using simulations is that these simulations are so complex that economists often cannot understand them and are often seen as being only tools for theory development. I think this leads to hesitancy in the field of economic research. “At the root of this, mathematicians say, is that the human mind is setup to understand scenarios with about three dimensions, while dozens or hundreds are within the grasp of machine-learning systems. Their power comes in discovering connections, often nonlinear, among those dimensions.” (Hope, 2017)

A very exciting area with great application for computer simulations and learning is in the stock market. If a machine can learn and recognize patterns with the ability to predict the future, which is what economic models often attempt to do, then it would be a great candidate for making money in equities markets. In “The Future is Bumpy: High-Tech Hedge Fund Hits Limits of Robot Stock Picking” it explains the difference between quantitative or quant funds, which are funds based on trading rules written by humans, similar to linear regression models where investors identify patterns to make decisions, and computer simulation/learning models. In computer simulation models, only the computer knows exactly why it did what it did. In the investing world, investors throw billions of dollars behind quant methods of trading, while the computer simulation area of the market is met with much hestinancy of investors.

Voleon, the hedge fund highlighted in the article, has been around for almost ten years and has an annualized return of about 10.5% compared to the S&P index annualized return of over 15% during the same period. I think that machine learning is bound to take over the investment field, but I think at this point, it is unable to take in all of the inputs that a human can, it also appears to be unable to account for the irrationality in today’s markets caused by humans taking part in the investment world. 
Using the comparison of linear regression models to quant funds and computer simulation economics to computer simulation based investing it would seem that both the investing world and the world of economists are not embracing the computer simulations as a whole. There is undeniable growth and progress in the world of computer simulations, and I think that in the coming years and months the trend of growth and understanding of computer simulations will grow and increase in popularity. For now, the overly constrained models appear to be here to stay. It has added understanding to many areas of economics and will surely be replaced by something better in the future, but that day has not yet come.

References
Buchanan, J. (1964). What Should Economists Do? Southern Economic Journal, 30(3),
213-222. doi:10.2307/1055931
Hope, B., & Chung, J. (2017, December 11). The Future Is Bumpy: High-Tech Hedge 
Fund Hits Limits of Robot Stock Picking. Retrieved December 15, 2017, from 
https://www.wsj.com/articles/the-future-is-bumpy-high-tech-hedge-fund-hits-limits
-of-robot-stock-picking-1513007557
Reiss, J. (2011, May 5). A Pleas for (Good) Simulations: Nudging Economics Toward an
Experimental Science. Retrieved December 16, 2017, from
http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/1046878110393941
Wooldridge, J. M. (2013). Introductory Econometrics: A Modern Approach(5th ed.). 
Mason, OH: South-Western.

